>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY JULY 30:
AFTER THE CONVENTIONS, TRUMP AND
CLINTON CONTINUE TO MAKE THEIR
CASE TO VOTERS, BUT HOW MUCH DO
POLITICAL CONVENTIONS MATTER
ANYMORE?
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT:
AMERICA'S CLIMATE REFUGEES BEING
FORCED TO LEAVE THEIR HOMES DUE
TO SEA LEVEL RISE.
>> ALL THAT WATER WAS LAND.
BASICALLY ALL LAND, EXCEPT FOR A
FEW PONDS HERE AND THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT, ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
A SPOKESPERSON FOR HILLARY
CLINTON HAS CONFIRMED THAT A
DATA ANALYTICS COMPUTER PROGRAM
USED BY HER PRESIDENTIAL
CAMPAIGN WAS "ACCESSED" AS PART
OF THE HACK OF THE DEMOCRATIC
NATIONAL COMMITTEE.
REUTERS REPORTS THAT THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT IS INVOLVED IN THE
INVESTIGATION, A SIGN THAT THE
HACK COULD BE STATE-SPONSORED.
THIS LATEST DEVELOPMENT APPEARS
TO BE PART OF A WIDER CYBER
ATTACK ON DEMOCRATIC POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS.
THE F.B.I. IS ALREADY
INVESTIGATING CYBER ATTACKS ON
THE DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL
COMMITTEE, AS WELL AS THE
PARTY'S FUNDRAISING ARM FOR THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS SAID THAT
EXPERTS HAVE ATTRIBUTED THE
CYBERATTACKS TO HACKERS IN
RUSSIA.
MEANWHILE, HILLARY CLINTON AND
RUNNING MATE SENATOR TIM KAINE
OF VIRGINIA BEGAN THEIR RUST
BELT BUS TOUR IN PHILADELPHIA
YESTERDAY.
HER SECOND STOP WAS A TOY
MANUFACTURING COMPANY IN
HATFIELD, PENNSYLVANIA.
THE CLINTON CAMPAIGN BUS IS
MAKING STOPS IN JOHNSTOWN AND
PITTSBURGH, PENNSYLVANIA, TODAY
AND YOUNGSTOWN, OHIO, THIS
EVENING, WITH MORE STOPS IN OHIO
TOMORROW.
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE
DONALD TRUMP WILL ALSO BE
STOPPING IN THE SAME
BATTLEGROUND STATES OF OHIO AND
PENNSYLVANIA, WITH PLANS TO
APPEAR IN COLUMBUS AND
HARRISBURG ON MONDAY.
THE COURTS HAVE THROWN OUT
VOTING RESTRICTIONS PASSED BY
REPUBLICAN LAWMAKERS IN THREE
STATES.
A FEDERAL JUDGE RULED YESTERDAY
THAT PARTS OF WISCONSIN'S 2011
VOTER I.D. LAW ARE
UNCONSTITUTIONAL, ORDERING THE
STATE TO MAKE PHOTO I.D.s MORE
EASILY AVAILABLE AND LIFTING
RESTRICTIONS ON ABSENTEE AND
EARLY VOTING IN THE DEMOCRATIC-
LEANING STATE.
ALSO, A FEDERAL APPEALS COURT
STRUCK DOWN A VOTER I.D. LAW IN
NORTH CAROLINA, RULING THAT IT
DISCRIMINATED AGAINST AFRICAN-
AMERICAN RESIDENTS WITH "ALMOST
SURGICAL PRECISION."
THE 2013 LAW REQUIRED PHOTO
IDENTIFICATION, AS WELL AS
LIMITING EARLY VOTING AND SAME-
DAY REGISTRATION.
AND IN KANSAS, A COUNTY JUDGE
RULED THE STATE MUST COUNT
THOUSANDS OF VOTES IN LOCAL AND
STATE ELECTIONS FROM PEOPLE WHO
DID NOT PROVIDE PROOF OF
CITIZENSHIP WHEN THEY
REGISTERED.
THE RULING COULD AFFECT UP TO
50,000 REGISTERED VOTERS IN
NOVEMBER.
HEALTH OFFICIALS HAD BEEN
FEARING FOR MONTHS THAT THIS
WOULD HAPPEN, AND NOW IT HAS--
THE FIRST CONFIRMED
TRANSMISSIONS OF THE ZIKA VIRUS
BY MOSQUITOES ON THE U.S.
MAINLAND.
TOURISM POWERS FLORIDA'S
ECONOMY WITH MORE THAN
100 MILLION VISITORS LAST YEAR,
AND STATE LEADERS THERE URGED
TOURISTS NOT TO STAY AWAY AFTER
THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
CONFIRMED THAT FOUR PEOPLE HAVE
BEEN INFECTED IN THE MIAMI AREA.
THE C.D.C. SAYS NO ACTUAL ZIKA-
CARRYING MOSQUITOES HAVE BEEN
FOUND YET IN FLORIDA AND AT THIS
POINT IS NOT ADVISING PREGNANT
WOMEN OR ANY OTHER VISITORS TO
AVOID TRAVEL TO THE MIAMI AREA.
MORE THAN 1,600 PEOPLE IN THIS
COUNTRY HAVE BEEN INFECTED WITH
THE VIRUS, MOST OF WHOM SHOW
FEW, IF ANY, SYMPTOMS, BUT THE
VIRUS IS LINKED TO BIRTH
DEFECTS.
JOINING US NOW FROM ATLANTA IS
DR. TOM FRIEDEN, DIRECTOR OF THE
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND
PREVENTION.
SO WE WANT TO TRY TO MAKE SURE
THERE'S NOT UNNECESSARY FEAR AND
PANIC SPREADING.
I UNDERSTAND WHY STATE LEADERS
WOULD WANT THE TOURISTS TO KEEP
COMING IN BECAUSE THAT'S A LOT
OF DOLLARS AND CENTS, BUT WHAT'S
THE THRESHOLD AT WHICH THE
C.D.C. SAYS THERE IS CONCERN FOR
PREGNANT WOMEN OR IF YOU ARE
TRAVELING TO THIS AREA?
>> THERE'S A SEVERAL-BLOCK AREA
IN NORTH MIAMI WHERE IT APPEARS
THAT ZIKA SPREAD IN EARLY JULY.
IF THERE OR ANYWHERE ELSE WE SAW
CONTINUING SPREAD OF ZIKA OR
EXPLOSIVE SPREAD OF ZIKA, THEN
WE WOULD ADVISE PREGNANT WOMEN
NOT TO GO.
THAT'S WHAT WE DID IN PUERTO
RICO BECAUSE WE ANTICIPATED THAT
THERE WOULD BE A ZIKA EPIDEMIC,
WHICH IS NOW, SADLY, WELL UNDER
WAY IN PUERTO RICO.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW DO WE MAKE
SURE THAT MIAMI AND OTHER PARTS
OF THE MAINLAND U.S. DON'T TURN
INTO PUERTO RICO AND DON'T HAVE
THE EXPLOSIVE GROWTH OF ZIKA
CASES?
>> FIRST OFF, PUERTO RICO HAS,
ALTHOUGH A BEAUTIFUL
ENVIRONMENT, THEY HAVE THE BAD
LUCK OF HAVING AN ENVIRONMENT
THAT'S VERY CONDUCIVE TO THE
SPREAD OF THIS PARTICULAR
MOSQUITO AND DISEAES CAUSED BY
THIS MOSQUITO.
SO DENGUE, AND NOW ZIKA HAVE
SPREAD VERY RAPIDLY WHEN THEY'VE
BEEN INTRODUCED.
THAT'S A REFLECTION OF
POPULATION DENSITY, THE LACK OF
SCREENS AND AIR CONDITIONING,
AND THE LARGE NUMBER OF PLACES
WITH STANDING WATER, AND THE
ABSENCE OF MOSQUITO-CONTROL
PROGRAM.
IN FLORIDA, THEY HAVE A
MOSQUITO-CONTROL PROGRAM.
IT'S VERY AGGRESSIVE.
AND IT'S BEEN GOING HOUSE TO
HOUSE IN THIS COMMUNITY, AND IN
EVERY COMMUNITY WHERE THERE HAVE
BEEN TRAVEL-ASSOCIATED ZIKA
CASES, TO REDUCE THE
LIKELIHOOD THAT THERE WILL BE
LOCAL SPREAD.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR SOMEONE
TRAVELING TO FLORIDA, WE HAVE A
CHOICE, PERHAPS, TO SAY, OKAY,
WELL, WE CAN MOVE OUR VACATIONS
ELSEWHERE.
WHAT ABOUT PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN
THAT ZIP CODE?
>> PEOPLE IN THAT AREA HAVE BEEN
OFFERED ZIKA TESTING,
PARTICULARLY IF THEY'RE
PREGNANT, BY THE STATE HEALTH
DEPARTMENT.
WE PROVIDED SUPPORT TO THE STATE
HEALTH DEPARTMENT FOR THAT.
IT'S, OBVIOUSLY, SCARY.
THAT'S WHY IT'S SO IMPORTANT
THAT WE WORK INTENSIVELY AND
ENSURE THERE ARE THINGS YOU
CAN DO TO PROTECT YOURSELF.
AS AN INDIVIDUAL YOU CAN WEAR
MOSQUITO-REPELLENT WITH DEET.
YOU CAN USE LONG-SLEEVED SHIRTS.
INDOORS, YOU CAN HAVE THE AIR
CONDITIONING ON TO REDUCE THE
LIKELIHOOD THAT MOSQUITOS WILL
COME.
ON THE COMMUNITY LEVEL IT IS SO
IMPORTANT THAT THERE IS A REAL
MOSQUITO-CONTROL PROGRAM, THAT
WE'RE TRACKING MOSQUITO
POPULATIONS, CONTROLLING THEM,
ELIMINATING STANDING WATER AND
CONTROLLING THE LARVA MOSQUITOS
AND ADULT MOSQUITOS.
>> Sreenivasan: ARE THERE
ADDIITONAL RESOURCES FROM THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT?
>> WE'RE VERY DISAPPOINTED THAT
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT-- THAT
THE CONGRESS DIDN'T PASS
SUPPLEMENTAL LEGISLATION.
THAT WOULD HAVE ALLOWED US TO
HAVE BOTH MORE RESOURCES, MORE
MONEY, FOR A ROBUST RESPONSE AND
MORE WAYS TO GET IT DONE FASTER.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, WHERE
ARE WE IN THE MOSQUITO SEASON?
IS THIS LIKELY TO GET WORSE
BEFORE IT GETS BETTER?
>> WE'RE STILL NOT YET IN THE
MIDDLE OF MOSQUITO SEASON.
WE EXPECT THIS TO CONTINUE FOR
THE NEXT TWO TO THREE MONTHS.
THAT'S WHY IT'S SO IMPORTANT
THAT PEOPLE PROTECT THEMSELVES.
WE EXPECT THERE WILL BE
ADDITIONAL BOTH
TRAVEL-ASSOCIATED AND LOCALLY
SPREAD CASEES OF ZIKA.
WHETHER THOSE TURN INTO CLUSTERS
OR OUTBREAKS IS SOMETHING WE
HAVE WITHIN OUR POWER TO
CONTROL.
>> Sreenivasan: DR. TOM
FRIEDMAN FROM THE CENTERS FOR
DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR JOINING
US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: WITH THE
REPUBLICAN AND DEMOCRATIC
CONVENTIONS NOW BEHIND US,
TRADITION HAS IT THAT
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES TRY TO
CAPITALIZE ON THE MOMENTUM THE
FOUR-DAY EVENTS ARE SUPPOSED TO
PROVIDE.
BUT THIS CAMPAIGN SEASON IS
UNLIKE ANY OTHER, AS BOTH DONALD
TRUMP AND HILLARY CLINTON TRY TO
OVERCOME HISTORICALLY LOW
APPROVAL RATINGS AND TRUST
ISSUES.
HERE TO DISCUSS THE
EFFECTIVENESS AND RELEVANCE OF
THE CONVENTIONS IS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
JEFF GREENFIELD, WHO REPORTED
FROM BOTH CLEVELAND AND
PHILADELPHIA OVER THE LAST TWO
WEEKS.
COULD NOT HAVE BEEN A MORE STARK
CHOICE IN NOT JUST THE CONTENT
BUT EVEN THE PRESENTATION OF
WHAT THESE TWO WEEKS WERE.
>> NIGHT-DAY.
THE REPUBLICAN CONVENTION WAS
HIT BY STUMBLES-- MELANIA'S
SPEECH TURNED OUT TO HAVE BEEN
BORROWED FROM MICHELLE'S.
THE FRESHMAN SENATOR FROM IOWA,
WHO THEY REALLY WANTED
SHOWCASED, WAS PUSHED OUT OF
PRIME-TIME BY A KIND OF
OVER-THE-TOP PRESENTATION BY A
RETIRED GENERAL.
THEN TED CRUZ SHOWS UP AND
DOESN'T ENDORSE.
BY CONTRAST, THE DEMOCRATIC
CONVENTION WAS SO STRUCTURED
THAT WHEN A SPEAKER USED A
PHRASE LIKE "STRONGER
TOGETHER," HUNDREDS OF SIGNS
WITH THAT EXACT PHRASE BY SOME
AMAZING COINCIDENCE POPPED UP.
AND THEY STRUCTURED EVERY NIGHT
TO MAKE A POINT, WHETHER IT WAS
ABOUT HILLARY, THE
UNACCEPTABILITY OF DONALD TRUMP.
AND THEN FINALLY AND PERHAPS
MOST REMARKABLY, TAKING A PAGE
FROM REAGAN'S BOOK, THE FLAGS,
AMERICAN EXCEPTIONALISM, U.S.A.!
U.S.A.!
IF YOU HAD TRANSPORTED ME 30
YEARS INTO THE FUTURE FROM WHEN
I FIRST STARTED COVERING IT, I
WOULD HAVE SAID, "OH, THAT'S A
REPUBLICAN CONVENTION."
>> Sreenivasan: LET'S TALK
ABOUT THE MESSAGES.
IT SEEMS BOTH CANDIDATES HAVE A
TOUGH TIME CONVINCING PEOPLE TO
LIKE THEM SO THEY REALLY GO OUT
THE THEIR WAY TO SAY, "WELL, I'M
SO MUCH BETTER THAN THE OTHER
PERSON."
>> THAT IS DEFINITELY THE MAJOR
THEME WITH BOTH CAMPAIGNS.
"YOU DON'T LIKE ME, CHECK OUT
THE OTHER PERSON."
IN THE REPUBLICAN CASE, THE
GOVERNING REPUBLICANS, LIKE
MITCH McCONNELL, THE SENATE
MAJORITY LEADER; PAUL RYAN, THE
SPEAKER, WERE AT PAINS TO SAY,
"OKAY, HE'S NOT REALLY ONE OF
US, BUT IT DOESN'T MATTER.
WE HAVE AN AGENDA AND HE'LL GO
ALONG WITH IT."
WHETHER THAT'S WHISTLING IN THE
DARK WE MIGHT OR MIGHT NOT FIND
OUT.
THE DEMOCRATIC MESSAGE WAS,
APART FROM THIS IS NOT LEFT AND
RIGHT, THIS IS A REASONABLE
PERSON VERSUS AN UNREASONABLE
ONE AND ALSO TRYING TO SAY ABOUT
HILLARY, OKAY, SHE'S NOT THE
WARMEST PERSON IN THE WORLD.
AND I THOUGHT HER ACCEPTANCE
SPEECH, BOTH FOR GOOD AND ILL, I
CAN'T DO POETRY.
I CAN'T REVEAL MYSELF.
WHEN I TRY TO REACH FOR FLOWERY
RHETORIC IT TURNS OUT TO BE
ROTARY CLUB LUNCHEON STUFF, BUT
WHEN I TALK PLAINLY AND SIMPLY,
EITHER ABOUT WHAT I'VE DONE OR
WHAT'S WRONG WITH TRUMP, THAT'S
WHEN HER MESSAGE, I THINK, JUST
MEASURED BY POTENTIAL
EFFECTIVENESS, WAS GREATER.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU KNOW,
THERE WAS A MOMENT WHERE I THINK
IT WAS SHONDA RHIMES MADE THIS
12-MINUTE BIOPIC VIDEO OF HER,
THERE WERE MOMENTS WHERE SHE
SEEMED CALM AND RELAXED AND
NORMAL SITTING AT A KITCHEN
TABLE BUT BY THE TIME SHE GOT IN
FRONT OF THE TELEPROMPTERS, IT
WAS BACK TO SOMEONE ELSE.
>> IT'S LIKE THEY DON'T KNOW
ABOUT MICROPHONES THAT CARRY
SOUND.
WHEN HILLARY CLINTON, AS SHE DID
WITH THE THE POINT ABOUT DONALD
TRUMP, DONALD TRUMP SAYS HE
KNOWS MORE ABOUT ISIS THAN
GENERALS.
NO, DONALD, YOU DON'T.
THAT IS SO MUCH MORE EFFECTIVE
THAN ATTEMPTING TO RATCHET UP
THE RHETORIC.
AND I THINK THAT'S A POINT I'M
SURE HER PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
TELLING HER ABOUT THIS FOREVER.
AND IT MAY BE ONE OF THE THINGS
THEY JUST HAVE TO LIVE WITH.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU KNOW, IN
THE END, IN THIS CYCLE
ESPECIALLY, DO THESE EVENTS
MATTER?
BECAUSE WE THINK ABOUT THE
THEATER AND THE STAGECRAFT AND
THE ORCHESTRATION-- DID WE BUILD
UP TO A CRESCENDO?
MOST PEOPLE AT HOME MIGHT NOT
EVEN WATCH THESE.
>> AND THE EVIDENCE OF THAT IS
THAT FOR ALL OF THE STUMBLES OF
THE REPUBLICAN CONVENTION,
DONALD TRUMP GOT A REASONABLE
BOUNCE OUT OF IT, YOU KNOW.
HE GOT-- DEPENDING ON WHAT POLL,
FOUR, FIVE, SIX POINGTS.
BUT THE POINT YOU MAKE IS MORE
SIGNIFICANT THAT THIS MAY BE A
YEAR WHEN THE LAWS OF POLITICAL
GRAVITY ARE IN TEMPORARY
SUSPENSION.
IF YOU LOOK AT HOW DONALD TRUMP
WENT TO THE NOMINATION, HOW MANY
POINTS ALONG THE WAY DID PEOPLE
SAY, "WELL, HE CAN'T SURVIVE
THAT."
AND THAT OUGHT TO BE A GUIDEPOST
TO THE FACT THAT WE SIMPLY ARE
NOT SURE WHAT WE ARE WATCHING
NOW.
AND SO WE COME OUT OF THE
CONVENTIONS, JUST AS YOU SAY, I
KNOW WHAT THE CONVENTIONAL
WISDOM WILL BE, BUT WE HAVE 100
DAYS BETWEEN NOW AND ELECTION
DAY, I WOULDN'T BET A PLUG
NICKEL ON KNOWING WHAT HAPPENS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, I
WON'T TAKE THAT BET.
JEFF GREENFIELD, THANKS FOR
JOINING US.
>> PLEASURE.
>> Sreenivasan: CLIMATE CHANGE,
PARTICULARLY RISING SEA LEVELS,
IS LEADING TO A NEW CATEGORY OF
PEOPLE NOW BEING CALLED "CLIMATE
REFUGEES."
IN ONE COMMUNITY, 60 MILES
SOUTHWEST OF NEW ORLEANS, A
TRIBE OF NATIVE AMERICANS IS
SEEING ITS HOMELAND SLOWLY
DISAPPEAR UNDERWATER.
THEY NOW FACE AN IMMINENT
DECISION TO RELOCATE, AND THE
PLAN FOR THEM TO DO SO MAY SET
THE STANDARD FOR OTHER COASTAL
COMMUNITIES WHO FACE THE SAME
CHALLENGE IN THE DECADES TO
COME.
DRIVING THE ROAD TO ISLE DE JEAN
CHARLES FEELS LIKE YOU'RE
HEADING STRAIGHT INTO THE GULF
OF MEXICO-- UNTIL FINALLY YOU
REACH A TINY SLIVER OF LAND,
LAND THAT'S BEING SWALLOWED BY
THE SEA.
IN THE PAST 60 YEARS, 98% OF
THIS ISLAND HAS DISAPPEARED.
THIS IS WHAT IT LOOKED LIKE IN
1963, ABOUT 11 MILES LONG AND
FIVE MILES WIDE.
THIS IS WHAT IT LOOKS LIKE
TODAY, ABOUT TWO MILES LONG AND
A QUARTER OF A MILE WIDE.
ALBERT NAQUIN IS CHIEF OF A
NATIVE AMERICAN TRIBE THAT HAS
CALLED THIS ISLAND HOME SINCE
THE 1800s.
HE FIRST TOLD US ABOUT THESE
CHANGES DURING OUR VISIT FOR PBS
NEWSHOUR FOUR YEARS AGO.
>> ALL THAT WATER WAS LAND.
ACTUALLY, IT WAS BASICALLY ALL
LAND, EXCEPT FOR A FEW PONDS
HERE AND THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, DO YOU
REMEMBER THIS WHEN YOU WERE
GROWING UP?
>> YES.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW'S IT
DIFFERENT?
>> DIFFERENT?
BECAUSE WE HAD TREES THERE.
THERE WERE ACTUALLY TREES UP IN
THIS AREA.
>> Sreenivasan: WHERE WE'RE
STANDING?
>> WHERE WE'RE STANDING, YES.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE ARE
MULTIPLE CAUSES FOR THE
CONTINUING LAND LOSS, INCLUDING
DECADES OF OIL AND GAS CANALS
SPEEDING UP EROSION AND THE
SINKING OF THE LAND BY THREE
FEET IN THE PAST CENTURY, ALONG
WITH EIGHT INCHES OF SEA LEVEL
RISE.
ONE EFFECT?
THE 60 OR SO PEOPLE STILL LIVING
HERE MUST MOVE BECAUSE THE
ISLAND IS BECOMING
UNINHABITABLE.
THE GULF OF MEXICO IS RAVAGING
THE FRESHWATER WETLANDS.
THE FOREST WHERE RESIDENTS ONCE
HUNTED AND PLANTED GARDENS NOW
HAVE ROWS OF DEAD TREES,
POISONED BY ENCROACHING
SALTWATER.
WHEN WE MET TRIBE MEMBER CHRIS
BRUNET IN 2012, HE WANTED TO
STAY ON THE ISLAND.
>> THIS LAND MAY NOT BE MUCH,
BUT THIS LAND IS OURS, AND WE
ARE STILL HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT NOW, HE'S
DECIDED TO GO, EVEN THOUGH HE'S
LIVED HERE ALL OF HIS 50 YEARS.
>> I GOT AROUND TO THINKING,
OKAY, ME, AT MY AGE, I COULD
PROBABLY FINISH OFF MY LIFE OVER
HERE ON THIS ISLAND.
BUT WHAT ABOUT THE YOUNGER
GENERATION THAT'S ABOUT TEN, 11,
12, 13, AND ALL OF THIS HERE?
I DON'T THINK SO.
I AM FOR THE RELOCATION, MOVING
AS A COMMUNITY.
IT MAKES IT A WHOLE LOT EASIER
TO WHERE YOU'RE JUST NOT
BEGINNING ON YOUR OWN, BUT THAT
YOU'RE ACTUALLY MOVING, YOU
KNOW, WITH FAMILY.
>> Sreenivasan: THE TRIBE'S
FIRST CHOICE IS TO RELOCATE TO
THIS 500-ACRE PARCEL OF LAND IN
NORTHERN TERREBONNE PARISH,
ABOUT 40 MILES TO THE NORTH.
>> THE PIECE OF LAND THAT WE'RE
LOOKING AT CAME OUT TO BE THE
BEST OF ALL THAT WE LOOKED AT.
I MEAN, THERE'S NO MARSH,
THERE'S TREES, AND IT'S HIGH
GROUND.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE GOAL OF THE
RELOCATION IS TO REUNITE WITH
TRIBE MEMBERS LIKE CHANTEL
COMARDELLE, WHO ALREADY LEFT THE
ISLAND AND ARE DISPERSED ALONG
THE LOUISIANA COAST.
FIVE GENERATIONS OF COMARDELLE'S
FAMILY HAVE LIVED ON THE ISLAND.
SHE VISITS THERE WEEKLY WITH HER
CHILDREN TO SEE RELATIVES,
INCLUDING HER ELDERLY
GRANDPARENTS.
>> THE PLAN RIGHT NOW IS TO MOVE
FAR ENOUGH NORTH TO WHERE IN A
HUNDRED YEARS MY GREAT-GRANDKIDS
WON'T HAVE TO WORRY ABOUT
FLOODING STILL.
>> SO THAT WAS OUR DISCUSSION
THIS MORNING.
>> Sreenivasan: KRISTINA
PETERSON IS THE DIRECTOR OF THE
LOWLANDER CENTER, A NON-
GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION
WORKING WITH THE TRIBE ON ITS
PLAN TO RELOCATE.
>> IT WOULD BE PROVIDING 42
HOUSES.
IT WOULD BE PROVIDING ALL THE
INFRASTRUCTURE, THE ROADS, ALL
THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF
UTILITIES.
ALL THE HOMES WILL BE ELEVATED
AT LEAST TEN FEET SO THAT
THEY'LL BE SECURE, MITIGATED
AGAINST STORM SURGES OR
HURRICANES, BUT ALSO THAT THE
SPACE UNDERNEATH CAN BE USED FOR
FAMILY SPACE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE NEW
COMMUNITY WILL BE BUILT
PARTIALLY WITH FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT FUNDS.
IN JANUARY, ISLE DE JEAN CHARLES
WAS INFORMED IT WILL BE GRANTED
$48 MILLION FROM THE DEPARTMENT
OF HOUSING AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT, OR HUD.
THAT MONEY WAS PART OF A LARGER
NATIONAL DISASTER RESILIENCE
COMPETITION THAT WILL DIVVY UP A
BILLION DOLLARS TO PAY FOR
PROJECTS THAT MAKE COMMUNITIES
MORE RESILIENT TO CLIMATE
CHANGE.
MARION McFADDEN RUNS THE GRANT
PROGRAM AND SAYS IT REPRESENTS A
POLICY SHIFT FROM REACTING TO
DISASTERS TO PREPARING FOR THEM.
>> WE SEE LOTS OF OTHER
COMMUNITIES THAT HAVE REPETITIVE
FLOOD DAMAGE, FOR EXAMPLE, OR
THAT HAVE OTHER DANGERS LIKE
FOREST FIRES.
AND SO, WE'VE TRIED TO CREATE A
LARGER CONVERSATION ABOUT HOW DO
WE PLAN FOR THAT?
HOW DO WE PREPARE FOR THAT?
AND WHERE HUD IS MAKING FUNDING
AVAILABLE, HOW DO WE MAKE SURE
THAT WE'RE DOING THINGS THAT ARE
GOING TO BE COST EFFECTIVE TO
PREVENT THE KIND OF HARM THAT
WE'VE SEEN FROM PAST DISASTERS?
>> Sreenivasan: PART OF WHAT
"COST EFFECTIVE" MEANS IS
KNOWING WHEN TO INVEST IN MAKING
A PLACE STRONGER, AND KNOWING
WHEN TO INVEST IN RELOCATION.
HUD AWARDED FUNDS TO PROJECTS IN
TEN STATES TO SUPPORT INNOVATIVE
WAYS TO MITIGATE IMPACTS OF
NATURAL DISASTERS-- EVERYTHING
FROM A CLEAN ENERGY PROJECT IN
MASSACHUSETTS, WHICH WILL SUPPLY
CRITICAL FACILITIES IN THE EVENT
OF POWER LOSS DURING NATURAL
DISASTERS, TO A PROJECT IN NEW
YORK CITY THAT CONSTRUCTS A
COASTAL FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM.
ISLE DE JEAN CHARLES WAS THE
ONLY RELOCATION PLAN FUNDED,
MARKING THE FIRST TIME THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT IS PAYING FOR
COMMUNITY RELOCATION IN RESPONSE
TO CLIMATE CHANGE.
McFADDEN HOPES THE ISLAND'S MOVE
WILL BE A TEST CASE FOR BUILDING
SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES IN
PLACES FACING INCREASING RISKS
FROM CLIMATE CHANGE.
>> IT SOUNDS EXPENSIVE WHEN YOU
HAVE TO BUILD, YOU KNOW, NOT
JUST HOUSING BUT ALL THE
INFRASTRUCTURE NECESSARY AND
CREATE A COMMUNITY FACILITY.
I ABSOLUTELY UNDERSTAND THAT
PEOPLE THINK IT SOUNDS
EXPENSIVE.
BUT WE WANT TO DO IT RIGHT AND
SHARE THOSE LESSONS WITH OTHER
COMMUNITIES THAT ARE GOING TO BE
FACING THE SAME KINDS OF
CHALLENGES.
>> HOW CLOSE DO THEY WANT TO BE
TO WATER?
HOW CLOSE DO THEY WANT TO BE TO
THE ISLAND?
SCHOOLS?
>> Sreenivasan: PAT FORBES IS
THE DIRECTOR OF LOUISIANA'S
OFFICE OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT,
WHICH IS OVERSEEING THE
RESETTLEMENT.
>> WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT NOT
ONLY DO WE GET THE FOLKS IN ISLE
DE JEAN CHARLES MOVED UP INTO A
SAFE PLACE AND A COMMUNITY THAT
CAN PRESERVE THEIR CULTURE, BUT
WE WANT TO HAVE A MODEL THAT
PEOPLE CAN REPLICATE IN OTHER
PLACES.
>> Sreenivasan: FORBES SAYS
HELPING THE ISLE DE JEAN CHARLES
COMMUNITY IS A PRIORITY.
BUT THERE ARE MANY COASTAL
COMMUNITIES IN DANGER, AND
LEARNING TANGIBLE LESSONS THAT
CAN BE REPLICATED ELSEWHERE IS
EQUALLY IMPORTANT.
>> WE'RE GOING TO FIGURE OUT
WAYS TO DO THIS ECONOMICALLY,
EFFICIENTLY AND WELL, MOST
IMPORTANTLY, SO THAT WE LEARN
SOME OF THOSE THINGS.
I DON'T KNOW THE ANSWER TO WHAT
IT'S GOING TO LOOK LIKE TO MOVE
A COMMUNITY OF 3,000 PEOPLE.
BUT I THINK THAT WHEN WE FINISH
THIS PROJECT, WE'LL HAVE A LOT
BETTER IDEA OF WHAT SOME OF
THOSE COMPLICATIONS LOOK LIKE.
>> WE DON'T MAKE THAT DECISION.
THAT'S PRIVATE INDUSTRY.
>> Sreenivasan: ALEX KOLKER, A
COASTAL GEOLOGIST AT TULANE
UNIVERSITY, SAYS THE DECISIONS
HERE MAY FORESHADOW CHOICES
OTHER AREAS FACE DUE TO CLIMATE
CHANGE.
>> THE RATES THAT WE SEE IN
LOUISIANA IN TERMS OF OVERALL
SEA LEVEL RISE ARE THE KINDS OF
RATES THAT WE MIGHT EXPERIENCE
IN THE REST OF THE COUNTRY IN
THE MIDDLE PART OF THE CENTURY
AS GLOBAL WARMING ACCELERATES.
THE LAND LOSS HERE IS SO
EXTREME, WE ARE SEEING THINGS IN
LOUISIANA THAT WE MIGHT SEE IN
PLACES LIKE THE CHESAPEAKE BAY
OR NEW YORK TEN, 20, 30 YEARS
FROM NOW.
>> Sreenivasan: KOLKER SAYS A
BLUEPRINT WILL BE NEEDED FOR
AMERICAN COMMUNITIES WELL BEYOND
THE LOUISIANA COAST, IF
PROJECTIONS ABOUT SEA LEVEL RISE
PROVE TRUE.
>> COASTAL RESTORATION IS NOT
SIMPLY ABOUT ECOSYSTEM
RESTORATION, RIGHT, THAT IT'S
NOT SIMPLY ABOUT PROTECTING
HABITAT FOR GREAT BLUE HERONS
AND DOLPHINS OR SOMETHING LIKE
THAT.
COASTAL RESTORATION IS REALLY
ABOUT PROTECTING PLACES FOR
PEOPLE TO LIVE.
>> I DIDN'T BECOME GOVERNOR TO
WATCH SOUTH LOUISIANA WASH AWAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT'S WHY
POLITICIANS, SCIENTISTS AND
BUSINESS LEADERS GATHERED AT THE
STATE OF THE COAST CONFERENCE
LAST MONTH IN LOUISIANA TO TALK
ABOUT THE ERODING COASTLINE AND
THE COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS FOR
SAVING PARTS OF IT.
LEVEES HAVE BEEN ONE MEANS OF
PROTECTION, LIKE THIS 98-MILE-
LONG LEVEE BEING BUILT BY THE
ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS AND PAID
FOR WITH LOCAL AND STATE TAXES.
BUT ISLE DE JEAN CHARLES WAS NOT
INCLUDED BECAUSE IT WOULD HAVE
COST HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS OF
DOLLARS MORE.
ON THE OTHER HAND, POINTE AUX
CHENES, A LARGER TOWN NORTH OF
ISLE DE JEAN CHARLES, IS
INCLUDED IN THAT LEVEE.
THERESA DARDAR LIVES THERE.
FOUR YEARS AGO, SHE TOOK US BY
BOAT TO A CEMETERY SHE COULD
ONCE WALK TO.
TODAY, THE ENCROACHING WATER IS
WORSE.
THESE TELEPHONE POLES, SOME OF
WHICH ONCE STOOD ON DRY LAND
JUST A FEW YEARS AGO, ARE NOW
SUBMERGED.
HER COMMUNITY IS STAYING PUT AS
LONG AS POSSIBLE, BUT IS KEEPING
A CLOSE WATCH ON THEIR
NEIGHBORS' RELOCATION.
>> IF THE TIME COMES THAT WE
HAVE TO DO A RELOCATION, A
RESETTLEMENT, WHATEVER YOU WANT
TO CALL IT, WELL, THEN, THEY'LL
ALREADY HAVE THE BLUEPRINT.
>> Sreenivasan: FAR AWAY COASTAL
COMMUNITIES HOPE TO BENEFIT FROM
THAT BLUEPRINT AS WELL.
DUE TO LAND EROSION, THE
RESIDENTS OF NEWTOK, ALASKA,
HAVE BEEN PLANNING FOR YEARS TO
MOVE NINE MILES INLAND.
BUT THAT HASN'T HAPPENED DUE TO
LACK OF FUNDS; HUD REJECTED
ALASKA'S PROPOSAL.
HUD ADMINISTRATOR McFADDEN SAYS
HER PROGRAM RECEIVED $7 BILLION
IN REQUESTS FOR THE $1 BILLION
IT COULD GRANT.
>> OUR MONEY THAT WE MADE
AVAILABLE IS A DROP IN THE
BUCKET AGAINST THE NEED.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR THE ISLE DE
JEAN CHARLES COMMUNITY, THE
RELOCATION IS ABOUT MORE THAN
JUST A SAFE PLACE TO LIVE.
THE TRIBE IS RAISING ADDITIONAL
FUNDS FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY
SYSTEMS AND COMMUNITY SERVICES
AT THE NEW SITE.
>> AS IT CAME FURTHER AND
FURTHER INTO THE PLAN, WE
DECIDED MAYBE WE SHOULD DO A
COMMUNITY CENTER, A HEALTH CARE
CENTER, MAYBE FOR ELDERS' CARE,
CHILD CARE, A KIND OF EDUCATION
WHERE WE CAN TUTOR OUR KIDS.
>> Sreenivasan: NO ONE WILL BE
FORCED TO MOVE OFF ISLE DE JEAN
CHARLES, AND THOSE THAT DO WILL
RETAIN RIGHTS TO THEIR PART OF
THE ISLAND-- OR WHAT'S LEFT OF
IT.
LONGTIME RESIDENTS LIKE CHRIS
BRUNET ARE HOPEFUL FOR A NEW
START BUT SAY LETTING GO OF
THEIR ANCESTRAL HOME IS HARD.
>> I FIND MYSELF CLINGING ON TO
THIS RIGHT HERE, SO, FOR ME,
IT'S NOT SO MUCH THAT I'M
ABANDONING IT OR LETTING IT GO;
IT'S JUST THAT I KNOW THAT WHAT
I'M UP AGAINST THAT'S GREATER
THAN ME, YOU KNOW, I JUST CAN'T
STOP IT.
AND SO THAT'S THE HARD PART.
>> Sreenivasan: READ MORE ABOUT
HOW RESIDENTS OF LOUISIANA'S
COASTAL COMMUNITIES ARE
GRAPPLING WITH THE EFFECTS OF
COASTAL EROSION.
VISIT US ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: A HOT AIR
BALLOON TODAY IN CENTRAL TEXAS
CRASHED KILLING ALL 16 PEOPLE
ONBOARD.
AUTHORITIES SAY THE BALLOON
CAUGHT FIRE AND CRASHED INTO A
PASTURE NEAR LOCKHART, IN
CALDWELL COUNTY, ABOUT 30 MILES
SOUTH OF AUSTIN.
THE BALLOON MAY HAVE STRUCK
NEARBY POWER LINES.
THE SHERIFF'S OFFICE SAYS F.A.A.
AND NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION
SAFETY BOARD INVESTIGATORS ARE
HEADING TO THE CRASH SITE.
IT WAS THE DEADLIEST BALLOON
CRASH IN U.S. HISTORY AND THE
SECOND DEADLIEST ON RECORD
ANYWHERE.
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL"
REPORTS THAT ACCORDING TO NEW
GOVERNMENT NUMBERS RELEASED
YESTERDAY, THE ECONOMIC RECOVERY
THAT BEGAN FOLLOWING THE 2008
RECESSION IS THE SLOWEST REBOUND
SINCE 1949.
AT JUST OVER 1%, THE 2nd QUARTER
GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT GROWTH
RATE-- THAT'S THE BROADEST
MEASURE OF THE HEALTH OF THE
U.S. ECONOMY-- FELL BELOW
FORECASTS FROM WALL STREET
ECONOMISTS.
DESPITE STRONG GROWTH IN JOBS
AND CONSUMER SPENDING, IT'S
BELIEVED THAT ANXIETY
SURROUNDING GLOBAL ECONOMIC
UNCERTAINTY, RECORD LOW OIL
PRICES AND THE U.S. ELECTION HAS
SLOWED INVESTMENTS FROM
BUSINESS, GOVERNMENTS AND THE
PRIVATE SECTOR.
TURKISH STATE MEDIA REPORTS MORE
THAN 750 SOLDIERS DETAINED AFTER
THE FAILED COUP ATTEMPT IN
TURKEY HAVE BEEN RELEASED.
THE MAJORITY OF THOSE RELEASED
WERE PERFORMING COMPULSORY
MILITARY SERVICE.
TURKEY'S INTERIOR MINISTER SAYS
MORE THAN 9,000 PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
ARRESTED SINCE THE COUP ATTEMPT
TWO WEEKS AGO.
MEANWHILE, MILITARY OFFICIALS
SAY TENSIONS ARE RISING IN THE
SOUTHEASTERN PORTION OF THE
COUNTRY NEAR IRAQ.
THE ARMY KILLED 35 KURDISH
MILITANTS TODAY AFTER THEY
ATTEMPTED TO STORM A MILITARY
BASE AND EIGHT SOLDIERS ALSO
WERE KILLED IN FIGHTING WITH
MILITANTS AT A CHECKPOINT.
HUNDREDS HAVE BEEN KILLED IN THE
REGION FOLLOWING THE BREAKDOWN
OF THE PEACE PROCESS BETWEEN
KURDISH MILITANTS AND THE
TURKISH GOVERNMENT LAST SUMMER.
ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
TOMORROW: FROM OHIO, INACTIVE
VOTERS, PURGED FROM THE VOTER
REGISTRY.
>> I'M A VETERAN, MY FATHER'S A
VETERAN, MY GRANDFATHER'S A
VETERAN.
NOW THEY AREN'T GIVING ME MY
RIGHT TO VOTE, THE MOST
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT I HAVE?
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, THE
U.S. NAVY HAS ANNOUNCED IT WILL
NAME ONE OF A NEW CLASS OF FLEET
OIL TANKERS AFTER GAY ACTIVIST
AND FORMER NAVAL OFFICER HARVEY
MILK.
IT'S THE FIRST NAVAL VESSEL TO
BE NAMED AFTER AN OPENLY GAY
PERSON.
MILK WAS THE FIRST OPENLY GAY
ELECTED OFFICIAL IN CALIFORNIA,
SERVING ON SAN FRANCISCO'S BOARD
OF SUPERVISORS.
HE WAS ASSASSINATED IN 1978.
CONSTRUCTION OF THE NEW FLEET IS
SET TO BEGIN IN 2018.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.